JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressional
Republicans yesterday unveiled
a budget that would dramatically
curb spending on a
host of social welfare
programs, including the
federal government's
Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program, or SNAP,
better known as food stamps.
The president's budget released
earlier this year also included
deep cuts to the program.
To see how those proposals
might play out, "NewsHour"
special correspondent Cat Wise
recently traveled to
Arkansas, a state that voted
heavily for Mr. Trump.
This report is part of Chasing
the Dream, our ongoing series
on poverty and opportunity
in America.
CAT WISE: In the small
town of Thornton, Arkansas,
Joannie Cayce fires up
her truck twice a month,
and drives to a Wal-Mart about
30 miles away to stock up on
fruits, vegetables, meat, milk
and other products
donated by the company.
When she returns to the local
food pantry her family has
run since the 1950s, some 200
residents are waiting, and
a desperate rush begins.
WOMAN: We get paid every two
weeks, and, by the end of the
week, it's like the cupboards
are bare, and we're
ramen noodling, you know?
WOMAN: I got two kids at
the house and stuff that's
hungry that I have to feed.
CAT WISE: Ms. Cayce, as she's
known here, says the number
of people she serves each
month has nearly doubled in
the past year-and-a-half,
from 350 to 650, even
as the state's economy
has improved.
JOANNIE CAYCE, Cayce Charities:
We see no employment, no
grocery stores, no craft stores.
Mostly, the families
are generationally poor,
and they can't move.
They don't have the money to
move or anywhere to go to move.
CAT WISE: The day we
visited, Brittney Williams
came to Ms. Cayce's with
her two young daughters.
At mid-month, she's already
run out of the $231 a month
she receives in food stamps,
or SNAP, the federal
government's Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance
Program for the poor.
BRITTNEY WILLIAMS, Receives
SNAP Assistance: I'm out of
food stamps within two weeks.
And that's another two weeks
week-and-a-half, two weeks,
that I'm sitting here, well, how
am I going to feed my kids?
You know, what am
I going to do next?
Am I going to have to beg people
for food, or go to Ms. Cayce,
or what if Ms. Cayce don't
come back to me in
time, and I run out?
CAT WISE: Brittney's husband,
Daryl, works full-time as a
security guard at the local
sawmill, making $11 an hour.
He says the family's bills
have been piling up for months,
and that they're now facing
eviction.
DARYL WILLIAMS, Receives
SNAP Assistance: I have got
a truck payment outside.
I have got all the
utilities in here.
After buying pull-ups and wipes
for them included, I have got
maybe $50 to $100 left a month,
and that's got to go in for
gas, so I can get back and
forth to work for the next two
weeks.
CAT WISE: To qualify for
food stamps, a family
of four in Arkansas must
make less than $32,000
a year.
Last year, 14 percent of the
state's population was on
SNAP, or about 426,000 people.
That percentage mirrors
the national picture.
In 2016, 44 million
Americans were on SNAP,
receiving an average
benefit of $126 per person
per month, or
about $1.40 a meal.
For years, the program has
been in the crosshairs of
conservative lawmakers,
who say the government
simply can't sustain a federal
program that last year cost $71
billion, up from $33 billion
in 2007, before the recession.
REP.
BRUCE WESTERMAN (R), Arkansas:
Instead of lifting people
out of poverty, many of our
welfare programs are actually
trapping people in poverty.
CAT WISE: Bruce Westerman is the
Republican U.S. representative
of the 4th District in
Arkansas, which
includes Thornton.
REP.
BRUCE WESTERMAN: We have
got to do something to get
the debt under control.
It's either do it the easy way
now, which may not seem easy
to some, or have the whole
thing come crashing down and
not be able to provide SNAP,
or Medicare and Medicaid or
anything to anyone because
we're in a financial crisis.
CAT WISE: Mick Mulvaney is
the Trump administration's
director of the Office
of Management and Budget.
MICK MULVANEY, White House
Budget Director: We're no longer
going to measure compassion
by the number of programs or
the number of people on those
programs, but by the number
of people we help get
off of those programs.
CAT WISE: In May, the
White House presented its
budget, which aimed to
slash federal spending
by $3.6 trillion
over the next decade.
If Congress were to pass that
budget, SNAP would lose $193
billion, around a quarter
of its funding.
The plan calls for tightening
standards on who qualifies
for the program, and, for the
first time, the budget shifts
a large chunk of the cost to
states, starting with 10 percent
in 2020 and rising to
25 percent in 2023.
For Arkansas, that would
mean $144 million added to
its state budget each year.
KATHY WEBB (D), Former
Arkansas State Representative:
I don't see where we
would make up that $144
million.
CAT WISE: You don't think
the state can make that up?
KATHY WEBB: I don't think
the state can make that up.
CAT WISE: Kathy Webb is a former
state Democratic representative
who now runs the Arkansas Hunger
Relief Alliance, a nonprofit
organization connecting and
advocating for the state's
food banks.
She says private charities
could not fill the gap.
KATHY WEBB: We cannot
make up the difference.
And all of the charitable food
network put together is about
a 20th of what the federal
safety net is.
CAT WISE: Webb also worries
about the effect a SNAP cut
would have on grocery stores in
poor communities.
RANDY LINDSEY, Business Owner:
It takes everything to make it.
There is no slack.
CAT WISE: Randy Lindsey and his
wife, Janice, run the Bottom
Dollar Store in Bearden, near
Thornton.
It's one of the few stores in
the area selling fresh produce
and meat, as well as household
items, flowers and more.
Lindsey, a Trump supporter,
says, in a tough economy,
every little bit helps.
RANDY LINDSEY: If I
lost 25 percent of SNAP,
for me, it would mean
cutting 10 to 15 hours
a week, or roughly 40
hours a month off payroll.
CAT WISE: So your employees
would be impacted?
RANDY LINDSEY: Yes.
It would impact employees.
That's a pretty
good chunk to lose.
There's not much gravy
in this operation.
We make less money, then
something has to be cut.
CAT WISE: Conservatives often
point out that SNAP expanded
considerably under Presidents
George W. Bush and Barack
Obama, and they are correct.
The rise was particularly
acute during the recession of
2008, when millions lost work
and joined SNAP's rolls.
Benefits were also increased as
part of the Stimulus Act, the
2009 law that pumped billions
in federal spending into
communities across the country.
Yet, since late 2012, both
spending and the number of
people on SNAP have fallen, and
the nonpartisan Congressional
Budget Office estimates that,
if no changes were made, the
share of the population
on SNAP would return to
pre-recession levels by 2027.
Still, SNAP remains historically
high, as more working families
like the Williams, and
seniors like 63-year-old
James Jackson earn less, thus
qualifying for the benefit.
JAMES JACKSON, Receives
SNAP Assistance: Anybody,
anyone, at any time can
be affected by poverty.
CAT WISE: Nearly 25 percent
of all seniors in Arkansas
face the threat of hunger.
That leads the nation,
according to a recent report.
Jackson, a trained chef and
a professional painter, has
struggled to find work since
his truck broke down.
He now lives in subsidized
housing in Little Rock
and receives $172 a
month in food stamps.
He voted for President
Trump, but urges him
not to make these cuts.
JAMES JACKSON: Give me a chance
to get off the very program
that you're trying to cut.
I want to get off.
But if you take away my ability
to get off, what can I do?
CAT WISE: In the long
run, it's more economic
opportunities, rather than
government assistance,
that Congressman Westerman
says will best help the
people of his state.
REP.
BRUCE WESTERMAN: It's a shame
that we have to have a program
that large in this country.
We need to provide more
opportunities for people that
are good-paying jobs, and not
just jobs, but careers
where they can build
homes and communities.
CAT WISE: Back in
Thornton, after the rush
has passed, Joannie Cayce
listens to the desperate
plea of a woman who
couldn't get there today.
WOMAN: I am a
grandmother of four.
I live alone.
Please, please, help me.
JOANNIE CAYCE: It's the people
that don't come in, it's the
people that live 30 miles
outside of this little food
bank and that I don't know
about or that I can't reach,
it's those people that keep me
awake at night, those children
that I know that are out of
school that aren't getting
a breakfast and lunch.
CAT WISE: Some hungry families
may not be able to get to
her, but Ms. Cayce spends the
rest of her day making
home deliveries.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Cat Wise in Thornton, Arkansas.